docs: update hook docs to include actions (#19114)
juju/juju: docs/user/reference/action.md

> See also: {ref}`manage-actions`

An action is used to perform a named, parameterised operation and report back the results of said operation.
It is triggered via the {ref}`juju-cli` and applied to one or more {ref}`units <unit>`.

> Actions are defined by a  {ref}`charm <charm>` to allow a {ref}`user <user>` with the right {ref}`access level <user-access-levels>` to interact with an {ref}`application <application>` in ways specific to the application.

Reviewer: I think this needs to be in the first paragraph, otherwise the first paragraph, although it does clarify how think of it conceptually, doesn't really say much of relevance to the user. But I don't want to block/delay your PR on that -- that's the sort of stuff I can take care of myself.

Author: I've moved this to the first paragraph and tweaked the following paragraph.

This may include anything from creating a snapshot of a database, adding a user to a system, dumping debug information, etc.

> See examples: [Charmhub | `kafka` > Actions](https://charmhub.io/kafka/actions), [Charmhub | `prometheus-k8s` > Actions](https://charmhub.io/prometheus-k8s/actions), etc.

The default behaviour is that the {ref}`juju-cli` blocks and waits for the action to complete. This synchronous behaviour allows actions to be easily included in command-line pipelines.
As an action is executing, any progress messages as reported by the action are logged to the terminal. When the action completes, the result is printed.
An action result is a map of key values, containing data set by the action as it runs, plus the overall exit code
of the action process itself, as well as the content of stdout and stderr.

The execution of an action is organised into {ref}`tasks <task>` and {ref}`operations <operation>`.
(If an action defines a named unit of work -- e.g., back up the database -- that can be executed on selected units, a task is the execution of the action on each target unit, and an operation is the group of tasks queued by running an action across one or more units.)

> The code used to implement an action can call the following hook commands in addition to {ref}`the others <list-of-hook-commands>`:

Reviewer: We're trying to move away from calling action commands hook commands, right? So how about:

```suggestion
The code used to implement an action can call any {ref}`hook command <list-of-hook-commands>` as well as the following action commands:
```

* `action-log`: to report a progress message
* `action-get`: to get the value of a named action parameter as supplied by the user
* `action-set`: to set a value in the action results map
* `action-fail`: to mark the action as failed along with a failure message

> 

Reviewer: We also talked about moving the contents of the action command pages from here https://canonical-juju.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/3.6/user/reference/hook-commands/list-of-hook-commands/ to this action page. If you want, I can take care of that myself.

Author: Since that involves changes to `conf.py` and `hook-commands/main.go` (I assume), I was thinking we'd do that as a separate PR and take care of any other required changes in that area at the same time.

(Starting with `juju v.3.0`: ) The execution of an action is organised into {ref}`tasks <task>` and {ref}`operations <operation>`. (If an action defines a named unit of work -- e.g., back up the database -- that can be executed on selected units, a task is the execution of the action on each target unit, and an operation is the group of tasks queued by running an action across one or more units.)

(action-execution)=
## Action execution

> 

Reviewer: The Action execution section is a bit of everything. We can make tighter by:

- Moving the background paragraph (its contents) into the doc intro.
- Removing the "What triggers it..." sections and just weaving that info into a few sentences that cover that material and answer the implicit question in the title "Action execution".
- Move the action commands down to their own separate section. (Basically, copy the action docs from https://canonical-juju.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/user/reference/hook-commands/list-of-hook-commands/ as subsections here. 

PS We'll need to do some cleanup, i.e., remove those from https://canonical-juju.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/latest/user/reference/hook-commands/list-of-hook-commands/ (I can do that, and also set up redirects) and its sources (including the `help-tool` command, which we want to rename to `hook-commands` and to which we want to add a `juju action-commands`; @hpidcock this feels like something that @CodingCookieRookie or @leyao-daily might pursue?).

Reviewer 2: I think for 3.6 we can start by splitting the `juju help-tool` command to have output that is categorised for the initial change. For 4.0 we can definitely change it more.

I'll add a card for next sprint. Thanks @tmihoc.

Reviewer 2: https://warthogs.atlassian.net/browse/JUJU-7691 is to update the 3.6 help-tool to add categories or availability labels.

https://warthogs.atlassian.net/browse/JUJU-7692 is to update the documentation generation to separate out the action commands.

@tmihoc can you please review the cards and @wallyworld too.

Author: In suggesting to Dora we make the change, I envisaged we could as a minimum change `hook-tool` to `hook-commands`. All the doc refers to "hook commands" and `hool-tool` is not an operational command - it exists purely to print a list of all the hook commands so changing it's name (and retaining `hook-tool` as an alias in 3,6, dropped in 4.0` would be the way to go).
It would be trivial even in 3.6 to take the next step and filter `action-*` from the hook commands list and include in an `action-commands` cli. But that could wait till 4.0.

Reviewer: @hpidcock the cards seem reasonable to me but I will defer to @wallyworld 's take who has the better overall view on what it would take.

> Actions operate in an execution environment similar to a {ref}`hook-execution hook`, with additional environment variables available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actions operate in an execution environment similar to a {ref}`hook <hook-execution>`, with additional environment variables available:
```

* JUJU_ACTION_NAME holds the name of the action.
* JUJU_ACTION_UUID holds the UUID of the action.

> An action is used to perform a named, parameterised operation and report back the results of said operation.

Reviewer: I'd move it up the previous section / intro text.

Actions are defined by the charm and invoked by the user (using {ref}`command-juju-run`). The default behaviour is that

> the command blocks and wait for the action to complete. During this time any progress messages as reported by the action

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the command blocks and waits for the action to complete. During this time any progress messages as reported by the action
```

are logged to the terminal. When the action completes, the result is printed.
An action result is a map of key values, containing data set by the action as it runs, plus the overall exit code
of the action process itself, and the content of stdout and stderr.

> The code used to implement an action can call the following hook commands in addition to {ref}`list-of-hook-commands the others`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code used to implement an action can call the following hook commands in addition to {ref}`the others <list-of-hook-commands>`:
```

> * action-log: to report a progress message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `action-log`: to report a progress message
```
and everywhere else

* action-get: to get the value of a named action parameter as supplied by the user
* action-set: to set a value in the action results map
* action-fail: to mark the action as failed along with a failure message

> In most cases, an action only has a need to run hook commands such as `config-get` to supplement the configuration passed

Reviewer: I'd put this as a tip.

in via the action parameters. A action may also commonly use `status-set` to update the unit or application status while
it is running.

> ### What triggers it?

Reviewer: "it" here is undefined

A charm user invoking the action name from the Juju CLI (`juju run <unit/0> foo`,  `juju run <unit/0> <unit/1> foo`).

### Who gets it?

All the units that the charm user has run the action on.

```{note}

> When implementing a hook using {ref}`Ops <ops-ops>`, any hyphens in action names are replaced with underscores

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When implementing a hook using [Ops](https://ops.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), any hyphens in action names are replaced with underscores
```

Also feels like a note that belongs in Ops docs.

in the corresponding event names.
For example, an action named `snapshot-database` would result in an event named `snapshot_database_action`
being triggered when the action is invoked.
```

```{tip}
The action handler in the charm can in principle cause other events to be fired.
For example:
 - deferred events will trigger before the action.

>  - if the action handler updates relation data, a `<endpoint name>_relation_changed` will be emitted afterwards on the affected units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - if the action handler updates relation data, a `<endpoint name>_relation_changed` hook will be emitted afterwards on the affected units.
```
I don't have the anchor at hand, but we should probably link to the relevant  hook section too.
